----------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------

The paper is mostly well written and well motivated. I would stress
that they should, at least, give a hint on the proofs of the
isomorphims theorems. In fact, saying that they are similar to the
ones in the literature is quite unsatisfactory.

The only part of the paper that puzzled me a lot was the one on
equational logic. When you say that you formalize the equational logic
as presented by Goguen and Lin, this is not entirely true, right? I
mean, while in your formalization all the equations of a theory share
the same set of variables, this is not the case in Goguen’s
work. Hence I wonder what kind of equational logic you are really
implementing, or talking about…


Finally, the subject relevant to LSFA, and I think that the audience
will certainly profit from its presentation.


=============
Typos and etc
=============

Page 1.

what is the “ADJ group”?

[ No lo vamos a decir! Que lo averigüe. ]

Page 2.

and prove its soundness and completeness —> w.r.t what?


Page 9.

deduction system is sound and complete. —> w.r.t. what?


==================
Other observations
==================


The paper is not in the LSFA format.

The page containing the codes has lots of typos and grammar errors
(like, e.g. “The first example shown in paper is a counterexample of
soundness. In our formalization is not.” —> which paper? and In our
formalization it is not.


----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
Description:

An Agda formalization of multi-sorted universal algebra is
given. According to the authors this is the first formalization of
universal algebra in Agda, the first formalization in type-theory of
derived signature morphisms and induced reduct algebras. In the
specification, operations are modeled using sets indexed by arities,
and an independent library of heterogeneous vectors.

Essentially, the paper discusses the formalization in Agda of the
basic algebraic notions and the formalization of the three isomorphism
theorems, which are related with properties of isomorphism,
epimorphisms, subalgebras, congruences and quotients.  Also, it is
formalized that the term algebra is initial. Gouguen and Lin
equational deduction system is proved sound and complete.  At this
point it should be stressed that this system constitutes indeed a
restricted conditional equational deductive mechanism.  This requires
disambiguation in the introduction and conclusion. Additionally,
signature morphisms are represented with their associated
“contra-variant” functor on algebras and it shown that this functor
preserves models.


Assessment

The Agda specification is very elegant and precise and in its current
status covers the basic elements expected in a formalization of
universal algebra. I read the specification, but I was not able to
follow the proofs in the Agda development, which as expected in
formalization papers was made available by the authors in the web. As
it is, this is an interesting formalization (in progress) of universal
algebra, which takes advantages from the constructive proof
technologies available in this proof assistant. I believe the topic
would be of interest for the LSFA attendants and suggest this paper be
accepted for presentation. Publication of this submission would
require additional effort of the authors.

Specific comments to the authors

Introduction:


Modify the sentences (introduction and conclusion) related with “the
formalization includes a deduction system for conditional equational
logic and prove its soundness and completeness”.  As it is written it
contradicts Birkhoff’s quasi-variety uncompleteness results.
Completeness holds only for varieties. I suggest be more explicit
about the actual restrictions that are given to the so called
“conditional” equational logic in order to assure completeness. As it
is presented, the reader cannot discriminate why conditional equations
cannot be specified such that the equational conditions encode
unsolvable equational problems.

In general, the presentation requires improvements in order to be
accessible both to non Agda specialists (or proof assistant
specialist, in general) and non algebraic specification specialists.


